March 8th is International Women's Day
and we decided to celebrate it
by talking with one of the founders
of Gather the Women, Marilyn Nyborg.
Marilyn says this group, which is
gathering steam around the world,
does not fit the profile of any other women's organizations
in that they do not have an agenda.
They simply gather together,
uplift and encourage one another
and allow the women's strength to begin showing itself
in the outside world in its own unique way.
Marilyn says, it's time for the story
of a women's value to change,
which can be difficult in an unconscious world
that still equates being feminine, with weakness.
(light happy music)
I love this quote, on the website
when you first come onto the website
and it says, "if ever there was a time
"when women shall come together
"purely and simply for the benefit of mankind
"it will be the power of which the world has never known."
And that was by a 19 Century poet named Mathew Arnold.
How appropriate.
How amazing and what a wise man he was.
What a wise man he was.
Way ahead of his time.
(laughter)
Let's get into
how Gather the Women came about.
As I was reading about the history of it
I came across one thing that really struck me
was a little article by Carol Hanson Grey.
Yes.
And I notice that,
I noticed the dates of the inspiration.
it was November of 2001, when women
had started calling her spontaneously
to tell her of their visions that we needed
to gather as women now.
Right?
Mmmhm, that's exactly right.
Right after 9/11.
Actually, I think, was it after 9/11?
I think she said November 2001.
Oh, I guess you're right, yeah.
Which would make sense
'cause that was, a lot of that thought
was going on at that time as I recall.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Can you pick it up from there
and explain what's happened?
Yeah.
Well it's interesting because I called Carol
and after, you know, out of the blue,
someone referred me to her.
And I called her and I said, you know,
I had this idea, it feels to me
like there are so many women's circles
that don't know what the other is doing.
And that using the internet, which she is a genius,
on, on that.
We could be bringing those connections together.
And she said, "Oop, others people are doing that
"but I, we've got a better idea,
"we're going to gather the women."
And I went, "yes, absolutely, I'm on."
And, and there we were.
We gathered, strangers really.
I think 12 or 13 women came together for a weekend
to say what does this really mean?
What does it mean to gather the women?
And why are we doing this?
Well of course a lot of women came up with,
you know, we should be fighting poverty,
and we should be, you know, looking at pollution
and all, all the issues
around war and peace and et cetera, et cetera.
And as we went deeper, we said,
you know there are wonderful organizations
already addressing those issues.
There are very few that are really bringing women together
across all kinds of, of divisions,
to have a deeper conversation.
And to reconnect with the value
of what it is to be a woman.
The feminine qualities within each of us
to go to the deeper nature.
And also that, part of what came out of there
was that all of us were spiritually based
and we wanted that to be the grounding
for Gathering the Women.
When you, can you tell
how this has impacted the lives of people globally.
I mea, I mean I noticed you have workshops,
not workshops, but congresses all over the world.
Mmhmm, yes, we do, we do.
And give us a glimpse of
what has happened since this was formed initially,
and how its played out in the world.
Well let me say what I think is unique about us,
and, and for which some women have criticized us.
We're not issue oriented, we're not saying to you
take a stand on this or that.
We are saying to you, it is important
to get beyond our differences
and to come together as women
for the benefit of all, of all people everywhere.
And so, as my friend locally says,
"when women come together, wonderful things happen."
And that has been our, our basic mission,
is to bring women together.
And, interestingly enough, what we're doing
is very, very feminine.
We are in, inspiring women, we are encouraging women,
we're encouraging them and supporting them
to find their passions, and to take their action
from their own heart.
We don't tell 'em what to do, we often say,
"we connect hearts, we're not trying to change minds."
But we're connecting hearts,
which is desperately needed on the planet right now.
We're such enormous divisions everywhere.
So what we do, then, is we, we invite women
to create gatherings in which women
from all walks of life can come together.
To be inspired, to network,
to hopefully to create circles of women,
ongoing circles of women, so women will be supported
in that effort to find their own empowerment
and their own voice.
Unlike other organizations, again,
we trust the women when they're really excited
and, and in touch with their own passion,
following their own heart,
they will do wonderful things in the world.
Yeah.
So really this is an emboldening,
the issues don't, the issues really aren't relevant then
because as you're emboldening women . . .
Yes.
and empowering women,
then they're going to take that forward
in their own unique way.
And start having their voice
in the world of the issues of the day.
Exactly, exactly.
And you know it's interesting to me,
I think if, if, when a woman is really grounded in
the divine feminine, that, that
piece of self that kinda comes with the package
that has been so incredibly dismissed
over the generations.
When they are in touch with those qualities
and begin to speak from that place,
it doesn't matter if they're speaking
on, on two opposing issues.
They will come to it from a different place,
from a feminine perspective,
which is much more about bringing things together,
much more about compromise,
much more about let's, how do we make it work,
how do we solve these solutions together?
Then, what we see so commonly out there
of division and divisiveness, and,
and the putting down of different opinions.
So, we feel when women are in touch with that,
they will speak from that place.
And again, we trust that that's what will happen with them.
And, I wanna also say that,
I mentioned earlier that, you know,
we know this, that so much or so,
so much of our own feminine selves have been dismissed
by, by the culture, by the patriarch.
And I would say that I think both
men and women are,
had been held prisoner by the patriarch.
Men have been told they can't cry,
they can't have feelings, they can't be sensitive.
And women have been told they have their place.
And that stays in the culture
even though we've had the vote for a little while now.
There is this subtleness in the culture
that, that, that keep women down,
that, that make it very risky sometimes
for women to speak their voice.
Unless they're doing it from a male point of view.
Right, which is,
in our congressional leadership for example
and it's, it's very yang.
Exactly, exactly.
And we're talking about now,
bringing those two things together,
within ourselves, not just the feminine
but masculine feminine
within each of us male and female.
And so, bringing that out into the world,
and coming from that place,
for me it's sort of like the earth is crying
for the voice of the mother.
It's crying for balance.
And what we're talking about
is we've had an extremely inbalanced system
for a couple thousand years now.
Exactly, yeah, yeah.
That, I think, I don't think anyone can argue
that point anymore, male or female,
it's way beyond that.
We're out of balance and spiraling,
some would say out of control,
on many many levels.
Absolutely.
Economically, environmentally,
and so balance need to be reintroduced.
And so what you're saying is to find
the harmony and balance between
the masculine and feminine principles,
which really requires extra effort
to get the feminine push back up again.
You got it.
(laughter)
Okay, well and, and in ancient times
in Egyptian times for example,
which is probably the last civilization
we can point to of any advancement,
early Egyptian days.
Mmhmm, mmhmm.
It was very common for the women to rule.
It passed through the blood lines.
That's right.
(clears throat)
Excuse me.
Through the women, and also to be those of the,
that held great importance in the temples.
Mmhmm, mmhmm.
And so now, in what ways
do you see this rising more organically?
Well it's interesting to me, I, I would, would add to that
since recorded history,
which by the way was recorded by men,
women have been left out.
And so I guess you might say many women
have taken that personally
and have acted under, under sort of, you know,
beneath the surface if you will.
More manipulatively
because it couldn't be done in the open.
Yes, yes, that's correct, that's correct.
And, and what we're really calling for
is the voice of, first of all for women, to,
to discover their passions, to find their voice
and to bring it into the world
wherever they may be.
In their homes, in their communities,
and certainly in the world itself.
And that is, that message rings true
for women around the world.
For me personally, I've had the experience
because I interfaith with so many people writing to us,
I feel like I've, I've learned more about other cultures
through the women I've talked to.
And I've heard the common voice of all women
crying out to be heard.
Mmhmm.
And leaving the days of this, kind of,
subtle manipulation behind and come out
into the sunlight to express one's views
on what needs doing around here
because it has been, when I think,
it happens with any, anybody, male female.
When one is repressed, the only way
to really have any effect is through manipulation.
Mmhmm.
And often times, women,
in all cultures, have been considered,
oh women are manipulative,
they'll use their whiles against you.
Well, how else does anything get done
when you can't overtly come out
and say this is what needs doing,
we need to do it in partnership.
Right?
It's absolutely about partnership.
it's also about being aware of your motivations too.
In other-words, you know, there an awful lot of women
who are very, very angry about all of this.
And so, what they do, they bring anger to it.
And we really ask women, it's very important
to look into your own heart,
and be aware of what place you're coming from
when you speak your voice.
Adding anger to the world is not what is needed
even if it's righteous anger,
even if we all agree with one another.
The anger itself, it has no longer a place in the world.
There's enough of that.
And we really call on women because it is
our basic instinct to bring about peace and harmony
in the world with out children, you know.
Right, right, and, and life.
And life.
Preserve, preservation of life.
Absolutely.
Let me get into this on a
maybe a little more esoteric
and big picture level.
Okay.
When you bring feminine types
of thought processes in.
Well, plenty of women hold PhDs
and can compete nose to nose on an intellectual IQ level.
Right.
There is a different kind of thinking
that permeates the feminine mind,
which is non-linear.
Mmhmm, mmhmm.
Which the world of science,
quantum physics and beyond,
is now acknowledging as essentially the way,
the way the structure of life on,
in the universe works,
is in a non-linear fashion.
Can you talk about how, what it's going to take
for the, those in power to being understanding
that non-linear thought is as valid as linear thought
in solving problems.
Yeah.
What I would say is that's really what our work is about.
Is also, inspiring women to recognize that.
The value of that non-linear way.
I was thinking on the way over,
we recognize a man's value in that
he has built this beautiful home.
We don't realize that it, house rather, built a house.
We don't realize that a woman makes it a home
and it's less seen, you don't see the bricks, you feel it.
And I think that what's ha,
and I believe this is coming about,
I mean, it's wonderful to see women taking their place
I mean, for, for speaker Pelosi
to be, be welcoming the children,
and her grandchildren's like, you know,
an eye opener for all of us to say,
oh, it's about time, what a relief
that, that we are doing this for the children.
And that is a purpose for being in power.
And I think that, you know I've noticed
the new president of Harvard is a woman.
And that is becoming a new,
there is this wonderful wave moving now.
it's, it's beginning to have a life of its own,
bringing back these very, very
long dismissed values that I, that,
that we're talking about.
And, one of my favorite books right now is,
is also The Female Brain,
which really talks about the distinction
between the male and female brain.
And when you understand that,
it really validates that there are
both value and differences between the two.
Yes, and some women
were a little up in arms about this.
Any time it's stated in any kind of work,
whether it's some peer review paper
or a book that we're different.
We are different and vive la difference,
I mean, we need to have the balance
of the masculine and feminine intellect
to be able to fix these problems we're up against.
Absolutely, absolutely.
And Jean Shinoda Bolen talks about that
also in her book, and, and the work that she does,
which is that, you know,
basically we are all male and female.
And while male dominates on one side with the female,
within a woman that is the female that dominates,
and also, we have the power of the male within us.
We have many of those instincts
that we can draw on ourselves.
And we temper them, by, by our feminine
which is the overriding.
And I think those are, those are the things
that we're talking about in terms of value.
That there is a new way, and we, we talk a lot about
the living school for feminine leadership, is what.
Women coming in together, the women
who are creating these activities
and these circles and these gatherings
are themselves walking stepping into leadership
in a new way and finding themselves,
really becoming empowered and the value
of the fact that they're doing it differently than men.
We tend to sit in circle, for example,
not in a dominant audience style.
We, we try to encourage that we,
we sit in circle at all times.
So there's no real pecking order, obviously.
There's not a pecking order and,
and this is a lot to work with.
None of us had been trained this way, you know,
these are instincts we have to rediscover in ourselves
and bring them forward.
And that's really a lot of our work right now.
And we're dealing with, I think in mass,
we're dealing with some issues
of self esteem and confidence.
Absolutely.
So for women to show up in a group
and feel that they even have the right to say something
or that they're going to be heard
or found to be interesting.
I, I think that's a hurdle that everyone
who shows up for these events has to get over.
We need to begin witnessing one another,
which is I think the great value
of a women's circle.
Is that, too often women report
they were in a class that was 30 women and 2 men.
But they themselves sort of allow the men
to, to do the speaking because it's inculturated.
Happens all the time.
We sort of like, you know,
so when it's just women, and some women
are coming into our, our gatherings
for the first time being just with women.
Other than fashion shows or things that have been
designed, you know, at a different level.
But to come into a room filled with women
and with that energy of women
and with the values of connecting and relationship
being dominant among those women,
it's a different experience.
And being heard, you know,
for the first time for their own opinion and valued for it.
And there is a bit of a hurdle,
and this goes back to the brain,
brain chemistry, the female brain.
Yes, that's right.
And that is, Dr. Joel Robertson's work
is quite interesting, he's had over 25, 30,000 case studies
on brain chemistry.
And, as he states in his book,
the average female brain, the average female
has 12% less serotonin production
than the average male brain.
Wow.
Now, that's not good.
I know.
(chuckles)
And this is because,
and he surmises, it's because of a general sense
of powerlessness through the, throughout history.
That's right, that's right.
Which is encoded in us,
it's encoded in us societally, in our family structures,
it's subtle; the boys get the, you know,
in past generations, even my generation,
the boys would get the, the nod to go to college,
the girls would become homemakers.
You know, when I was a little kid,
that's what we actually believed our role was still.
Now it's changing.
So, to create, to create that sense of self esteem
will also literally give us, allow us to begin
creating the chemicals for that, those feel good chemicals,
serotonin for example.
How do we stimulate this earlier in life?
What is your group, what is Gather the Women doing
to bring teenage girls into the loop?
I, let, I wanna jump back a second.
Go ahead,
there's a lot of stuff I just brought up.
Go for it.
Is that it, it crosses my mind too,
when you watch children on the playground.
That a little boy will say to another little boy,
the worse thing he could say, "you're a girl."
That's right.
You're a girl.
And a teenager either using fag as a way
of describing a feminine guy, or,
just by saying, "you're doing that like a girl."
It's wrong, it's bad, our governor calls,
calls his, his distractors girly men.
Girly men, like it's the greatest insult.
Absolutely.
It is an insult in this culture
to call a man a woman, or feminine in any way.
It is not, though, for a girl,
I mean very often all this is mixed, very often,
a mother will say with great pride, of an athletic daughter,
"she's such a tomboy."
But what is this communicating
to the brains of young boys, and young men,
and to the girls themselves?
So, that's number one.
You asked about the teenagers,
I wish I could say that we have been doing more.
We want to do more, very much want to do more,
but we're very young.
And, also, what I'd, I'd like to say is,
it's amazing what a few women can do.
There have been from the beginning,
really three women, and then eventually seven to nine women.
So we have a small core of women
that are initiating these activities around the world.
We now have been joined by 30 women
across the United States who are taking on
the responsibilities of what we call regional coordinators.
And we are also, as you can see, are doing events,
or in, not in, we're not doing them,
we're actually inviting the women
of those countries, to do events,
Gather the Women events on various continents.
We just finished, was this year,
we've done in Canada in Vancouver.
And then in December, Africa,
where over 450 women came from the bush,
came from out of the most rural areas.
That's fabulous.
And came into, and came together.
And it wasn't being run by Gather the Women,
there were a number of us present.
I, I wish I were there, but a number of us were present
really as witnessing and as, as ways of connecting
with our sisters there, we learned a great deal
from that experience.
The next one will be in Australia
and that'll be followed by Brazil.
And then next year we have others on the,
on the docket.
Who are some of your major partnerships
and alliances with right now?
Right now I would say some of the major ones,
Millionth Circle, which is Jean Shinoda Bolen's work.
And she's on our site,
she's a wonderful woman we interviewed.
Yes, she's wonderful.
And in, well, let me jump back again.
Often we are criticized for not doing
or taking action in the world,
and yet as I said, what we do is very feminine
and not measurable.
So one of them, for example, is Jean's connection with us
that, her most recent book, came from the stage
of Gather the Women, congress.
Where she, where she gave a talk
and from that talk came the book.
What is the name of this newest book?
The name of the book is called Urgent Message from Mother.
Oh right, right.
Gather the women and save the world.
Yes, yeah.
And I, and part of that came from the inspiration
of seeing women are actually gathering to do that.
Now certainly, I mean, go back and say,
Jean has written about this for years.
God's and Every Man, Goddess's in Every Woman.
Wonderful, awesome.
And her Millionth Circle offer women
the opportunity to understand the ways of working
in circle with one another
in the creation of women's leadership.
And she does that work around the world.
And so, for anyone watching,
take a look at our interview with her,
that's also excellent.
Yes, please do, 'cause she's wonderful.
The other one, is Piece by Piece.
Mmhmm.
And you, you may know about their work.
And what they're doing is among other things,
they're connecting circles of women,
the women who are gathering in Africa
and in other places on the world with circles here.
Mmhmm.
So that, you know, one of the great things,
the great issues in this country I think,
is that we're very, very limited in our world view.
And we, what we get from the news.
But to have personal contact with women overseas
and in other cultures, expands my world,
and I believe it is an expanding experience
for circles to say, "well we talked about this this week,
"what did you talk about in your circle?
"And how was your, how were your views
"the same or different that what we, that what we did."
So there's, there's that communication between circles
which they're doing beautiful work.
Before we jump forward a bit
to National Women's Day,
which the timing of this is perfect.
International Women's Day.
International Women's Day, excuse me, yes.
(laughter)
I wanted to just bring up the teen thing
one more time, just briefly.
Yes.
What would you say now
for anybody watching this,
they might do to help bring younger girls in to this,
into circles of their own, of their own creation
that aren't there to bitch about their boyfriends
and talk about the, you know, latest stuff at Sephora.
(laughter)
That actually opening the door for another interesting
invitation, there is group up in Bainbridge,
I think Washington, run by Linda Wolfe,
and what she's doing is teen talking circles.
Perfect.
And she has written a beautiful guide
and she herself offers training for facilitators.
Oh, what's the name of the guide, do you know?
Teen Talking Circles, I think, yeah.
I believe it is.
And you can do that by just Googling online.
Actually, I think it may be TeenTalkingCircles.com.
Mmhmm.
But, but she's doing, and she is one of our,
of our co-creators if you will,
or one of our sister links as we are beginning to call it.
She's working with teenagers, in circle.
Groups with boys only, groups with girls only and combined.
In which they have the freedom to speak openly
about what's going on in their lives.
We know, for example, that gangs provide a family
for, for kids, which on the negative sense.
Right.
These circles provide another kind of family
for these kids where they feel accountable
to this group for what they're doing.
And the women and men who are being trained to run them
are really first put through an extensive training
in looking at their own teen years.
And understanding what safety is for young people
and how listening is the value of this, of this opportunity.
Makes sense, and peer pressure,
getting past the peer pressure that
this is beyond being a cheerleader
and you're actually going to get together
to talk about things more personal and substantial.
Precisely, yeah, and she's doing some beautiful work
and I'd love to see that grow.
And I know that there are other programs
across the country like that,
but this is the one we are most in contact with.
Very good, well we'll put that up on the site.
And you know, what's one of the things
that I think is the value of what we're doing
is that we're learning, because we bring together
no only individual women, but organizations
and groups and people who are doing different things.
We get to know what they're doing
and become a link for that.
I'll tell you, I hope it's a quick story.
One of the women I was in communication with
was a young woman in Nigeria
who wrote to say, "do we have Gather the Women there?"
And I wrote back, I said, "no, you're it."
(chuckles)
And interestingly enough, within about a month,
I received another note, from another woman,
a Muslim woman in Nigeria, who said,
"are you doing anything here?"
And I said, "ah, no, but, Judy is."
So, the two of them connected,
and out of their work, they've created something
called Circles of Concern.
Judy then called me, and said, or wrote to me and said,
"I'm, I'm coming to America, and what I would really
like to do is find some place to, to do,
kind of an internship, to learn something
to bring back to my country."
So I thought, what, I thought of different ways
of doing that, but then I wrote to Linda right away
and said, "would you be interested in having an intern."
And then Judy came that following spring,
and stayed there for about a month.
And then came and visited us in Grass Valley,
which was quite delicious.
Fascinating.
But again, that's, that's sort of
the subtle unmeasurable ways in which
so many of the links that we are making, are quiet.
And, and not always, you know, big news.
But that was my favorite story.
That's a nice story,
and I'm noticing more, I read a lot of eclectic journals
that women in Africa, and also from the Muslim world
are making some major breakthroughs societally
and their cultures.
Yes, awesome.
They're really out there,
they are winning major international awards
in terms of environmental and otherwise and agriculture.
So it's, it seems like it's almost taking hold
in other countries faster than it is here,
which brings us to International Women's Day.
Yes. yes.
And the fact that this
is actually a holiday in some countries.
In some countries it is.
This is March 8th?
Yes, yes, yes.
Can you talk about that a little bit?
I wish I could tell you the countries,
I, I know in Russia it is actually a holiday,
'cause we, but, one year, we heard this lovely note
from a woman who said,
"thank you so much for Gather the Women.
"Usually on International Women's Day,
"the men bring us roses on Monday
"and then they yell at us on Tuesday.
"This year we came together as women
"and, and shared our stories and our support,
"and it was different, so we thank you."
And it was just, it was a lovely, lovely comment
for the difference that it made
in celebrating International Women's Day.
It is, actually, International Women's Day
has been around a very, very, very long time.
I remember it being reinitiated, if you will,
it 1975 at the United Nations
First World Conference in Mexico City.
And, and as I said, some countries have taken to it,
and some haven't.
This one is one, this country is one in which
I, I wish we could say we, we hear more about it
and we don't.
And when we do hear about it in this country
it is very often looking at our history
and just honoring what has been done by women.
I think we bring something different to it.
And what I believe we bring to it is,
is making it very current.
And also that it is our intention
when we ask women to come together
for International Women's Day, to,
to basically invite the future, if you will,
within each women, to inspire, to connect,
to plug them in to all the various activities
that they could be involved in,
and to encourage them.
To create their own.
We also bring to it, I believe a spiritual perspective,
which is that we, we're not religious per se
and we honor all cross sections of, of spirituality.
But we also encourage women to listen to their hearts
and listen to spirit.
And ask themselves, you know,
where am I coming from on this,
am I, why am I angry?
Or, where am I coming from on this,
what is motivating me in this moment?
Is it my agenda or is it my service to others?
And so we continually ask women to check in.
Mmhmm.
And to come from that place.
Any, this year, 2007.
Yes, yes.
Anything major we need to note
for International Women's Day?
Well, I'm going to certainly encourage people
to look at our website, which is
www.GatherTheWomen.org.
And there's a variety of things going on
and unfortunately we only have a few listed,
but I know of more of them,
we are working with women in Israel.
There are two places in Israel,
one working in interfaith community,
one working in the peace community.
I've been writing to a woman in Nepal
for many years now, and she tells me
what she's doing there.
And for them, it's interesting,
it's almost like going back to the 50s and 60s for us,
they are on the streets asking for their rights as women.
Rights, basic rights as women.
I was called recently by a woman in the Congo
who said they too are marching on,
on International Women's Day for their rights.
Each culture has a very different need
in their expression and what their culture needs now
to have those voices heard.
In this country, we are, we have gatherings,
gosh, my mind's going to all the different places.
In Kansas City, there's a small group gathering there.
We have a large group in Minnesota,
in Saint Cloud, Minnesota, in Florida,
in May and Boston.
As well as Idaho, where a woman is actually planning
a state conference for Gather the Women.
And throughout several places within California
and, golly, I'm, I'm losing all them.
Yeah, we did go to the site
and see some of them.
Yes, I wanna say, one, one other thing,
there's a wonderful participant in Canada.
While we say we don't take stands on issues per se,
I would imagine every women, woman that I know,
including myself, has taken a stand, and do take stands.
But one of the women up there,
who's very active in politics, said recently,
she is fed by Gather the Women.
That's where she gets her nurturing
and her feeding and her inspiration.
And I think that really summarizes what we bring to women.
That makes total sense.
And I guess, we'll know that it's really taken seed
when the day comes where we have
International Human Being Day
Oh, I love it.
because there is no more division
between those who have more power versus less power.
Yes.
And I would hope that's what women will bring to the table.
Is, is that perspective.
Thank you.
Please feel free to check out our interview
with Jean Shinoda Bolen as well,
who also speaks to the subject
of the imminent need for the planet to begin embracing
feminine input into the healing
of our vast social and political differences.
It's an inspiring interview.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(light happy music)